J. Chen and S. Zhou, "Vision2Touch: Imaging Estimation of Surface Tactile Physical Properties," ICASSP 2023 - 2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), Rhodes Island, Greece, 2023, pp. 1-5, doi: 10.1109/ICASSP49357.2023.10097053.Abstract: Similar to the human’s multiple perception system, the robot can also benefit from cross-modal learning. The connection between visual input and tactile perception is potentially important for automated operations. However, establishing an algorithmic mapping of the visual modal to the tactile modal is a challenging task. In this work, we use the framework of GANs to propose a cross-modal imaging method for estimating the tactile physical properties values based on the Gramian Summation Angular Field, combined with visual-tactile embedding cluster fusion and feature matching methods. The approach estimates 15 tactile properties. In particular, the task attempts to predict unknown surface properties based on "learned knowledge". Our results surpass the state-of-the-art approach on most tactile dimensions of the publicly available dataset. Additionally, we conduct a robustness study to verify the effect of angle and complex environment on the network prediction performance. keywords: {Visualization;Imaging;Signal processing algorithms;Estimation;Signal processing;Predictive models;Robustness;Visual-Tactile;Physical Properties Estimation;Generative Adversarial Network;Cross-Modal},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=10097053&isnumber=10094560

M. Ibrahim Awan and S. Jeon, "Estimating Perceptual Attributes of Haptic Textures Using Visuo-Tactile Data," in IEEE Access, vol. 13, pp. 109931-109945, 2025, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2025.3581685.
Abstract: Accurate prediction of perceptual attributes of haptic textures is essential for advancing VR and AR applications and enhancing robotic interaction with physical surfaces. This paper presents a deep learning-based multi-modal framework, incorporating visual and tactile data, to predict perceptual texture ratings by leveraging multi-feature inputs. To achieve this, a four-dimensional haptic perceptual space encompassing rough-smooth, flat-bumpy, sticky-slippery, and hard-soft dimensions is first constructed through psychophysical experiments, where participants evaluate 50 diverse real-world texture samples. A physical signal space is subsequently created by collecting visual and tactile data from these textures. Finally, a deep learning architecture integrating a CNN-based autoencoder for visual feature learning and a ConvLSTM network for tactile data processing is trained to predict user-assigned attribute ratings. This multi-modal, multi-feature approach maps physical signals to perceptual ratings, enabling accurate predictions for unseen textures. To evaluate predictive accuracy, we employed leave-one-out cross-validation to rigorously assess the model’s reliability and generalizability against several machine learning and deep learning baselines. Experimental results demonstrate that the framework consistently outperforms single-modality approaches, achieving lower MAE and RMSE, highlighting the efficacy of combining visual and tactile modalities.
keywords: {Haptic interfaces;Visualization;Accuracy;Predictive models;Surface texture;Feature extraction;Surface roughness;Solid modeling;Rough surfaces;Deep learning;Haptic texture attributes;visuo-tactile learning;deep learning;tactile signal processing;texture recognition;human haptic perception},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11045379&isnumber=10820123


W. Zhao, Q. Xu, H. Wang and Z. Ye, "Cross-Modal Hashing for Material Surface Properties Fusion," 2023 International Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing (IWCMC), Marrakesh, Morocco, 2023, pp. 194-198, doi: 10.1109/IWCMC58020.2023.10183090.Abstract: In the tasks of robotic interaction with its surrounding environments, it is critical to judge the properties of the surrounding objects quickly and accurately. Existing high-definition cameras and tactile sensors can collect high-precision visual and tactile information, but it cannot comprehensively describe the surface properties of objects from single-modality. Hence, how to establish the cross-modal fusion between visual and tactile plays an important role in material surface judgement. To achieve above target, we propose a Hashing Learning For Cross-Modal Material Surface Retrieval. First, we apply hashing learning to cross-modal fusion, which can reduce storage costs and improve query efficiency. Then, a self-attention network is proposed to eliminate redundant information, in other words, to extract cross-modal correlation information between different modalities. Finally, in the process of generating hashing codes, a center constraint is applied to protect intra-modal structural information. Experimental results on the publicly available data set demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. keywords: {Wireless communication;Visualization;Codes;Semantics;Robot vision systems;Tactile sensors;Data mining;Cross-modal retrieval;deep hashing learning;self-attention;surface material},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=10183090&isnumber=10182368

S. Luo, W. Yuan, E. Adelson, A. G. Cohn and R. Fuentes, "ViTac: Feature Sharing Between Vision and Tactile Sensing for Cloth Texture Recognition," 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Brisbane, QLD, Australia, 2018, pp. 2722-2727, doi: 10.1109/ICRA.2018.8460494.Abstract: Vision and touch are two of the important sensing modalities for humans and they offer complementary information for sensing the environment. Robots could also benefit from such multi-modal sensing ability. In this paper, addressing for the first time (to the best of our knowledge) texture recognition from tactile images and vision, we propose a new fusion method named Deep Maximum Covariance Analysis (DMCA) to learn a joint latent space for sharing features through vision and tactile sensing. The features of camera images and tactile data acquired from a GelSight sensor are learned by deep neural networks. But the learned features are of a high dimensionality and are redundant due to the differences between the two sensing modalities, which deteriorates the perception performance. To address this, the learned features are paired using maximum covariance analysis. Results of the algorithm on a newly collected dataset of paired visual and tactile data relating to cloth textures show that a good recognition performance of greater than 90% can be achieved by using the proposed DMCA framework. In addition, we find that the perception performance of either vision or tactile sensing can be improved by employing the shared representation space, compared to learning from unimodal data. keywords: {Visualization;Tactile sensors;Cameras;Task analysis;Surface topography},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8460494&isnumber=8460178

D. Chen, P. Gao, T. Fan, L. Wei and J. Liu, "Object Attribute Recognition Method Integrating Visual–Tactile Data and Multitask Learning," in IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 25, no. 21, pp. 40232-40244, 1 Nov.1, 2025, doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2025.3610694.
Abstract: Accurate object attribute recognition is crucial for intelligent robots to efficiently accomplish various tasks. However, current methods suffer from limitations such as reliance on single-modality inputs and poor intertask correlation across attribute recognition tasks. To address these challenges, this study proposes a multidimensional object attribute recognition framework by integrating visual–tactile data fusion (VTDF) with multitask learning (MTL) techniques. First, we design a spatiotemporal (ST) attention-based VTDF module, enabling the model to fully process, interact, and fuse cross-modal visual and tactile information, thereby significantly improving the precision of single-attribute recognition. Second, we introduce an MTL method grounded in cross-task attention (CTA) queries, which facilitates efficient intertask information sharing and interaction while ensuring task balance. This allows each task to leverage shared knowledge from other tasks while preserving its own task-specific features, ultimately enabling robots to acquire more accurate classification results across all target attributes. Experiments demonstrate that the proposed VTDF module effectively integrates features from visual and tactile modalities, substantially enhancing single-attribute recognition accuracy. The MTL module successfully achieves intertask information interaction and balanced performance. Finally, by combining these two modules, our framework achieves efficient and precise recognition of multidimensional object attributes, empowering intelligent robots with comprehensive perception of environmental objects. Our code can be available at https://github.com/CdpLab/ObjectAttrRecogn
keywords: {Visualization;Feature extraction;Transformers;Computational modeling;Multitasking;Accuracy;Training;Sensors;Robots;Correlation;Multitask learning (MTL);object attribute recognition;tactile learning;visual learning;visual–tactile data fusion (VTDF)},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11175298&isnumber=11223172


W. Zheng, H. Liu and F. Sun, "Lifelong Visual-Tactile Cross-Modal Learning for Robotic Material Perception," in IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 1192-1203, March 2021, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2020.2980892.
Abstract: The material attribute of an object’s surface is critical to enable robots to perform dexterous manipulations or actively interact with their surrounding objects. Tactile sensing has shown great advantages in capturing material properties of an object’s surface. However, the conventional classification method based on tactile information may not be suitable to estimate or infer material properties, particularly during interacting with unfamiliar objects in unstructured environments. Moreover, it is difficult to intuitively obtain material properties from tactile data as the tactile signals about material properties are typically dynamic time sequences. In this article, a visual-tactile cross-modal learning framework is proposed for robotic material perception. In particular, we address visual-tactile cross-modal learning in the lifelong learning setting, which is beneficial to incrementally improve the ability of robotic cross-modal material perception. To this end, we proposed a novel lifelong cross-modal learning model. Experimental results on the three publicly available data sets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.
keywords: {Task analysis;Robot sensing systems;Material properties;Visualization;Correlation;Data models;Cross-modal learning;lifelong learning;material recognition;robotic perception},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9062383&isnumber=9365681


Y. Gao, D. Wu, L. Zhou and H. Sari, "Cross-Modal Tactile Coding," ICC 2025 - IEEE International Conference on Communications, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2025, pp. 5091-5096, doi: 10.1109/ICC52391.2025.11161697.Abstract: Incorporating tactile feedback into traditional audio-visual multimedia services has gradually become the killer application in the Beyond 5G era. However, current state-of-the-art tactile coding approaches struggle to achieve extreme compression, thereby significantly impacting the transmission quality of visual streams due to resource competition. To address this challenge, this paper proposes an efficient cross-modal coding method that fully leverages semantic correlations between visual and tactile modalities. Specifically, we first construct a crossmodal coding architecture based on the predictive coding, enabling flexible and scalable bitrates to meet diverse compression requirements and adapt to dynamic network conditions. By introducing explainable surface semantics (e.g., friction, texture) as intermediates, we then associate visual modality with tactile modality to extract their potential correlations from the perspectives of multiple physical properties. Finally, we design a cross-modal feature fusion module through exploiting semantic correlations to further improve reconstruction quality of tactile signals, thereby reducing the bitrates required for tactile residuals and facilitating more efficient transmission. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed tactile coding method achieves high bitrate compression, with almost no impact on visual stream quality. keywords: {Surface reconstruction;Correlation;Semantics;Bit rate;Tactile sensors;Predictive coding;Feature extraction;Encoding;Surface texture;Video codecs;Tactile coding;cross-modal;semantic correlation},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11161697&isnumber=11160705

H. Liu, F. Wang, F. Sun and B. Fang, "Surface Material Retrieval Using Weakly Paired Cross-Modal Learning," in IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 781-791, April 2019, doi: 10.1109/TASE.2018.2865000.
Abstract: In this paper, we investigate the cross-modal material retrieval problem, which permits the user to submit a multimodal query including tactile and auditory modalities, and retrieve the image results of visual modalities. Since multiple significantly different modalities are involved in this process, we encounter more challenges compared with the existing cross-modal retrieval tasks. Our focus is to learn cross-modal representations when the modalities are significantly different and with minimal supervision. A novelty is that we establish a framework that deals with weakly paired multimodal fusion method for heterogenous tactile and auditory modalities and weakly paired cross-modal transfer for visual modality. A structured dictionary learning method with a low rank and common classifier is developed to obtain the modal-invariant representation. Finally, some cross-modal validations on publicly available data sets are performed to show the advantages of the proposed method. Note to Practitioners—Cross-modal retrieval is an important task for industrial intelligence. In this paper, we establish a framework to effectively solve the cross-modal material retrieval problem. In the developed framework, the user may submit a multimodal query including acceleration and sound about an object, and the system may return the most relevant retrieved images. Such a framework may find extensive applications in many fields, because it can be flexible to deal with a multiple-modal query and uses the minimal category label supervision without the need of strong sample pairing information between modalities. Compared with the previous material analysis systems, this paper goes beyond previously proposed surface material classification approaches as it returns an ordered list of perceptually similar surface materials for a query.
keywords: {Visualization;Robot sensing systems;Task analysis;Machine learning;Acceleration;Surface treatment;Cross-modal learning;multimodal data;surface material retrieval},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8447247&isnumber=8681660


H. Liu, F. Sun, B. Fang and D. Guo, "Cross-Modal Zero-Shot-Learning for Tactile Object Recognition," in IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 2466-2474, July 2020, doi: 10.1109/TSMC.2018.2818184.
Abstract: In this paper, we address the learning problem of classifying untouched tactile instance with the help of visual modality. The proposed method is based on dictionary learning and we impose different penalty terms on coding vectors between visual and tactile modalities. Using such structured coding vectors, the visual-tactile cross-modal transfer can be achieved. A set of optimization algorithms are developed to obtain the solutions of the proposed optimization problems. After then, we can use the obtained dictionary to predict the coding vectors of the new untouched tactile samples and further determine its label. Finally, we perform extensive experimental evaluations on publicly available datasets to show the effectiveness of the proposed method.
keywords: {Visualization;Dictionaries;Training;Machine learning;Optimization;Task analysis;Encoding;Cross-modal transfer;dictionary learning;zero-shot-learning},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8338135&isnumber=9119209


P. Xiong, K. He, A. Song and P. X. Liu, "A Novel Multi-Modal One-Shot Learning Method for Texture Recognition," in IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 182538-182547, 2019, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2959011.
Abstract: Most machine learning algorithms require a large set of training samples in order to achieve satisfactory performance. However, this requirement may be difficult to satisfy in practice. Take the one-shot learning (OSL) problem on texture recognition for example; the machine learning algorithm is difficult to achieve satisfactory results. In order to solve this problem, a novel multi-modal one-shot learning method for texture recognition is presented. First, in order to improve the robustness of identification and the anti-interference to noise, we addressed the nontravel texture recognition challenges of learn information about object categories from only one training sample by fusing varied modalities data, including image, sound and acceleration, which provides rich information regarding textures. Second, a novel dictionary learning model is designed, which contains the various modalities information, and can simultaneously learn the latent common sparse code for the different modalities. Third, an original regularization term is developed to enhance the degree of distinction of different classes. Furthermore, the common features of the three modalities are evaluated in the case of one-shot learning and used as the basis for feature selection. In the end, experiments were performed based on a data set which was published openly to validate the effectiveness of the presented method.
keywords: {Machine learning;Training;Feature extraction;Acceleration;Neural networks;Learning systems;Encoding;Texture recognition;dictionary learning;one-shot learning;multi-modal fusion},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8931584&isnumber=8600701


A. Dutta, E. Burdet and M. Kaboli, "Visuo-Tactile Based Predictive Cross Modal Perception for Object Exploration in Robotics," 2024 IEEE International Symposium on Robotic and Sensors Environments (ROSE), Chemnitz, Germany, 2024, pp. 1-7, doi: 10.1109/ROSE62198.2024.10590901.Abstract: Autonomously exploring the unknown physical properties of novel objects such as stiffness, mass, center of mass, friction coefficient, and shape is crucial for autonomous robotic systems operating continuously in unstructured environments. We introduce a novel visuo-tactile based predictive cross-modal perception framework where initial visual observations (shape) aid in obtaining an initial prior over the object properties (mass). The initial prior improves the efficiency of the object property estimation, which is autonomously inferred via interactive non-prehensile pushing and using a dual filtering approach. The inferred properties are then used to enhance the predictive capability of the cross-modal function efficiently by using a human-inspired ‘surprise’ formulation. We evaluated our proposed framework in the real-robotic scenario, demonstrating superior performance. keywords: {Training;Visualization;Uncertainty;Shape;Filtering;Friction;Gaussian processes},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=10590901&isnumber=10590795

H. Liu, F. Sun and X. Zhang, "Robotic Material Perception Using Active Multimodal Fusion," in IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 66, no. 12, pp. 9878-9886, Dec. 2019, doi: 10.1109/TIE.2018.2878157.
Abstract: Robotic material perception is an extremely important but challenging problem for industrial intelligence. The main difficulties come from the fact that the material properties are difficult to be comprehensibly evaluated by single visual, auditory, or tactile modality. Conventional multimodal fusion methods require collecting all of the multimodal information for a testing sample before the recognition. This is expensive, redundant, and may incur large latency. To tackle this problem, a new active fusion framework for the multimodal material recognition is proposed in this paper. We first adopt the adversarial learning method to obtain the modal-invariant representations to effectively bridge the gap between different modalities and then develop a reinforcement learning method for active modality selection. The developed framework and algorithms are evaluated on a publicly available dataset and show promising material recognition results. The developed framework provides an effective method for industrial material inspection.
keywords: {Robot sensing systems;Training;Encoding;Machine learning;Optimization;Service robots;Active perception;adversarial learning;material recognition;multimodal fusion;reinforcement learning},
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8533623&isnumber=8784422


M. Kaneda, M. Takeuchi, S. Kaneko and H. Kajimoto, "Relationship between onomatopoeia and physical properties when pressing a soft object," 2022 IEEE Haptics Symposium (HAPTICS), Santa Barbara, CA, USA, 2022, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/HAPTICS52432.2022.9765623.Abstract: In Japanese language, onomatopoeia is used to describe perceptions such as the state of the skin and the feeling of touch. Although some studies have examined the relationship between onomatopoeia and physical properties expressing haptic sensation, few studies have examined the relationship between onomatopoeia and physical properties of flexibility. In this study, we aim to clarify the relationship between onomatopoeia and physical properties of soft objects. We asked subjects to describe the tactile sensations of 12 different silicone gels using onomatopoeia under three conditions: visual only, tactile only, and visuo-tactile. The range and number of phonetic occurrences of the onomatopoeia were extracted, and the relationship between onomatopoeia and physical properties was investigated. While we did not observe distinct differences in the range and number of onomatopoeic sounds under each condition, we observed differences in the types of onomatopoeia recalled due to differences in hardness under all conditions. In addition, regression results based on quantification theory class I showed that some of the explanatory variables of onomatopoeia (e.g., second mora contracted sounds and second mora vowels) change their significant contribution to the onomatopoeia depending on the change in conditions, even for a physical property. keywords: {Visualization;Pressing;Phonetics;Skin;Haptic interfaces},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9765623&isnumber=9765563

X. Liu, H. Wu, S. Fang, Z. Yi and X. Wu, "Multimodal Surface Material Classification Based on Ensemble Learning with Optimized Features," 2020 IEEE International Conference on E-health Networking, Application & Services (HEALTHCOM), Shenzhen, China, 2021, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/HEALTHCOM49281.2021.9398999.Abstract: In this paper, we propose a novel method for multimodal material classification based on ensemble learning and optimized features. The proposed method consists of three key steps. Firstly, we extract a set of features for each modality. Compared to existing methods, the extracted features are relatively simple but more effective when they are incorporated into the classifiers. Then, the feature selection algorithms, including Multi-Cluster Feature Selection (MCFS) and Laplacian Score (LS) are employed to reduce the feature dimension due to the curse of dimensionality. Finally, an ensemble learning method is proposed to integrate the merits of different feature selection methods. The effectiveness of the proposed method is demonstrated on the LMT-108 surface material dataset which includes multiple modalities such as sound, acceleration, and image. The experimental results have shown that our approach performs better than the competing methods. keywords: {Support vector machines;Learning systems;Laplace equations;Image color analysis;Feature extraction;Acceleration;Data mining;Surface material recognition;multimodal learning;feature selection;ensemble learning method},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=9398999&isnumber=9398911

H. Liu, F. Sun and B. Fang, "Lifelong Learning for Heterogeneous Multi-Modal Tasks," 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Montreal, QC, Canada, 2019, pp. 6158-6164, doi: 10.1109/ICRA.2019.8793517.Abstract: In this work, we investigate the lifelong learning problem from the viewpoint of heterogeneous multi-modal fusion. The main challenges come from the fact that the common representation between heterogeneous modalities should be persistently learned and the learned classifier for each multi-modal task should be persistently updated. To address this problem, we construct a multi-modal lifelong learning framework which deals with the consecutive multi-modal learning tasks and develop an efficient online dictionary learning algorithm to solve the multi-modal lifelong learning problem. Finally, we perform experimental validation on a complicated material recognition task and show the promising results. keywords: {Task analysis;Dictionaries;Knowledge based systems;Machine learning;Encoding;Optimization;Robots},URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8793517&isnumber=8793254

